---
title:      Meeting notes (2020-09-17)
layout:     main
---

## Warm-up with Menti (5 minutes)

Question of the day on
[Menti](https://www.mentimeter.com/):

- Most confusing point in the class so far?

## Logistics (5 minutes)

- Add/drop ending
- Class buddies
- Project 1 plans
- Alternate times (TR 1:25-2:40 in the Gather.town office)

## Walk-through: playing with profilers (20 minutes)

## Breakout groups (25 minutes)

1. What is the size of the following C struct, and why?

       typedef struct foo_t {
           char a;
           double b;
       } foo_t;
  
2. Consider an explicit time stepper on a 256^2 mesh (65536
   points).  Each time step takes time proportional to the mesh size
   (a few flops per mesh point), and every 100 steps we spend 5ms to
   write to disk.  Roughly what fraction of the time is spent on disk
   writes, assumeing that we are going at about the peak flop rate?

3. How fast can you make the centroid code, in principle?

## Report out (5 minutes)

## Afternotes

There were two themes in the Menti poll: confusion over computer
architecture (particularly caching), and confusion over tools
(compilers, Unix, etc).  This is consistent with what I've heard in
past versions of the class, so it is not soo much of a surprise, but
it's worth a couple comments.

### Architectural confusion

Re-emphasize something that I also said in the slides: for the
purposes of this class, my goal is not to teach you a lot of computer
architecture.  Rather, it's to teach you to recognize the handful of
architectural features that are most relevant to scientific
high-performance computing: caches and memory speeds, and things
involving instruction-level parallelism.

It is fine if you get confused about the difference between conflict
and capacity misses.  It's useful to distinguish between them because
we might consider different tuning strategies to get around one or the
other, but I am not going to quiz you on it.  Similarly, I don't know
that you need to know about the details of instruction-level
parallelism on modern x86-64 chips.  I mostly want you to know enough
to realize when your code is running slower than it ought to, and to
recognize why.

The architecture material in this class is mostly in the first couple
of weeks.  We'll keep using the ideas throughout, but we'll be
focusing more on organizational patterns and algorithmic ideas soon
enough.

### Tools and environments

I do assume students coming into this class know something about
programming in a C-family language, enough to pick up C.  I don't
assume you are all familiar with Unix.  Fortunately, there are good
resources online (with pointers from the web page and course slides),
and I am happy to talk in office hours or via email/Slack/Piazza to
clear up points of confusion.  You can also ask your peers; we do have
Unix expertise in the class, it just isn't uniformly distributed.

I certainly don't assume that you are familiar with GCP, nor with
working in a batch queued environment (as is common in most
supercomputing centers and many clusters).  But we need these types of
resources if we're going to do examples on machines bigger than your
personal laptops or desktops (which we are).  So we'll spend some time
in the meetings to help get you familiar with these things, and you
can also ask questions of me or of your peers.

Part of the reason for learning these tools is because we need them
for the projects.  But learning about these software tools (compilers,
build systems, Unix, etc) is the thing that students most frequently
tell me they valued after the course ends.  Sometimes it is more
specific than that, and I'm still not sure how I felt about the
student comment that the most valuable thing they learned in 5220 was
how to use make!  It was not anonymous, and I know the student enjoyed
the class, so I think this was mostly a sign of how useful they ended
up finding makefiles.  Anyhow, this is the sixth time I've taught this
course at Cornell (and I also taught it at NYU and was a TA for the
equivalent at Berkeley twice before that), and this appreciation for
knowing about the tools seems to be a general theme in post-course
feedback, even if not everyone likes it at the time they are picking
it up.  I suppose this makes sense, since even many of you who are
never going to tune a piece of code after this course ends might want
to do some work on a machine that is bigger than your laptop or
desktop, or might find yourself needing to do some work in a
Unix-style environment.
